From wagner@luthien.in-berlin.de Thu Dec 20 13:33:07 2001
Newsgroups: comp.lang.modula3
Path: cs.tu-berlin.de!fu-berlin.de!hirsch.in-berlin.de!luthien.in-berlin.de!wagner
From: Olaf Wagner <wagner@luthien.in-berlin.de>
Subject: Recent CM3 activities
User-Agent: tin/pre-1.4-19990216 ("Styrofoam") (UNIX) (FreeBSD/4.4-RELEASE (i386))
Reply-To: wagner@elego.de
Sender: wagner@luthien.in-berlin.de
Organization: 'Holistic Computing Services'
Message-ID: <Go1oyJ.67K@luthien.in-berlin.de>
Date: Sat, 8 Dec 2001 21:56:43 GMT
Lines: 121
Xref: cs.tu-berlin.de comp.lang.modula3:12558


Though progress has been very slow, I'm happy to announce that there 
are still some activities, and things do slowly improve. During recent
weeks the following things have happend:

1. A lot of new packages have been imported into the cm3 distribution,
   and quite a few more packages are now compilable again. Most of the
   new (and missing) stuff has been contributed by Blair MacIntyre
   and is copyrighted by Columbia University. He dug up his
   shared object package which I had been looking for in vain all 
   around the internet ftp and http servers, and contributed all
   his obliq extensions and changes and some base packages. Due to
   these extensions, now about two dozen packages have become useful
   again. (The sharedobj package was a missing peace in the cm3 
   distribution, and I was unwilling to rip out all its traces.)

   The following base packages have been added:

   m3-libs / debug
           / listfuncs
           / patternmatching (regex and globbing (from John Polstra's CVSup))
           / embutils
           / binIO (from m3.org)
   m3-comm / events
           / rdwr
           / sharedobj
           / sharedobjgen
           / udp (from m3.org)

   The following cm3 packages now compile due to these imports and
   some fixes:

   m3-obliq / synloc
            / synex
            / metasyn
            / obliqrt
            / obliqparse
            / obliqprint
            / obliq
            / obliqlibemb
            / obliqlibm3
            / obliqlibui
            / obliqlibanim
            / obliqbinmin
            / obliqbinstd
            / obliqbinui
            / obliqbinanim
            / obliqsrvstd
            / obliqsrvui
            / visualobliq
            / vocgi
            / voquery
            / vorun

   To most of the obliq packages I have added a 
   BlairMacIntyre_integration_branch, to which I committed the code 
   from Blair MacIntyre's packages, which contain his obliq extensions 
   (repo). Though these packages mostly compile, they do not work out 
   of the box (due to bitrotting and my inadequate integration),
   which is why they are still on a branch and not in the main code line.
   I would welcome anybody who has a look at them and does some repair and
   integration work :-)

   Changes and new code have also been committed to m3-www/http and 
   m3-ui/opengl.  Several of the m3-www and m3-demo packages are now 
   usable again (like fisheye). The algorithm animation package 
   mentor does compile again, but does not animate anything for reasons 
   still dark to me, which is a pity.
   I would appreciate any knowledgeable person who has a look at the 
   animation package and gives me a hint what is still wrong.

2. I have fixed a bug in the compiler leading to non-termination
   in certain combinations of quake procedure declarations and calls.
   One example was the mentor package. The bug was in the embedded
   quake interpreter, which saved a wrong scope reference when
   encountering a procedure declaration, and could possibly lead
   to a cycle in scopes (and thus endless lookups).

3. I have made some attempts to extract the difficult-to-port part
   of the m3 garbage collector (system call wrappers and vm
   protection) into their own library. The first tries didn't work,
   because the m3 compiler needs m3core as the the root of all
   libraries, and does not work well with anything that does not
   depend on (and import) m3core. I now think I know how to handle
   this, though it's not done yet. The idea is that m3core relies
   on one of two small libraries: m3gc-simple, which offers no
   vm and system call wrapping support (and thus no incremental and
   generational garbage collection) but should be easily compile- and
   portable, and m3gc-enhanced, which will contain everything needed
   for sophisticated garbage collection (and be much more difficult
   to compile and port). This should greatly simplify to port and
   maintain cm3 on new and changed platforms.

4. Some re-organization of interfaces and modules has taken place.
   TextExtras (which was used quite often in different packages)
   has been added to libm3, and the rest of m3tk/src/misc has
   been extracted in its own package, as it is also generally
   useful. All uses of these modules in the cm3 distribution have
   been fixed (hopefully).

All the recent changes are currently only available via CVS or CVSup
from www.elegosoft.com, as I've had no time to build new archives
and update the documentation. This will probably be done after I have
finished the work on (3). I cannot guarantee that it will happen
in this year though ;-)

I also hope that I will finally be able to offer direct CVS 
repository access for CM3 to everybody who wants to work on the
packages during January or February of 2002. I hope that this will
improve the quality and speed of CM3 development work and be of
interest to at least a handful of skilled people around the
world :-)

Have fun with the new (and old) code!

----------

2001-12-20:

  The changes for (3) have been made for all POSIX platforms and new
  binary installation archives have been built.


