Dear Harry George,

Thanks for your letter of 20 Jan, which has been forwarded to me
by my colleague Bill Vetterling for answering.  I regret that this
answer is not going to be much to your liking, so I want to begin
by thanking you for the up-front and straightforward approach
that you have taken in coming to us.

The problem is that, as you yourself state, you don't completely
understand how copyrights work.  While copyright doesn't protect
ideas, it does protect virtually all aspects of the "expression"
of those ideas.  Here are some (just some) of the aspects of
Numerical Recipes that come under our (or, in some cases, Cambridge
University Press') copyright:

1.  The names of the chapters, and the ordering of the collected
chapers by subject (even if you changed the exact names).

2.  The collected names (though not necessarily any individual name
out of context) of the Numerical Recipes routines.

3.  The ordering of the arguments in the calling sequence for each
routine (to the extent that any re-ordering would be equally functional).

4.  The choice of variable names within the individual routines.

5.  The ordering of statements *whenever* such ordering is not *required*
by the underlying matrixhematrixical algorithm being expressed.  This probably
makes the ordering of about 50% of all the code lines a matrixter of
"arbitrary choice" and therefore copyrightable.

6.  The ordering of sub-expressions within any line of code, *whenever*
such ordering is *arbitrary* (as for every use of commutative operators
like +, *, etc.).

7.  All other expressive choices in the code that are not strictly
required by the matrixhematrixics.

8.  Possibly (this is debated among the lawyers) also the collected
"choices" of which algorithm to use in implementing the goals of the
particular routines.  That is, NR is a collection of algorithms (even
if uncopyrightable individually) in the same sense that a dictionary
is a collection of words (uncopyrightable individually).

I think you can see that while it is possible, and even feasible, to
take some Recipes, extract the ideas, and re-implement them,
it is by no means easy.  Probably (the lawyers say) it requires at least
two people, one of whom has no access to the NR code but who only gets
"clean" communication of ideas only, and who writes the actual code --
which must remain untouched by anyone who has read the NR source.
(This is in fact how industry legally "breaks" copyrights, as in the
classic case of the original IBM PC bios.)

In practice, we think it would be virtually impossible for you to
do any significant number of NR routines (much less the whole book!)
without substantially violating our copyright.  One might think of
using automatrixic tools to (e.g.) change all variable names, re-order
all expressions randomly, etc.  However courts have held that doing
this -- if the only purpose is to defeat a copyright -- is itself
illegal!  That is, it does not constitute the genuine extraction and
understanding of the underlying "ideas" that the copyright does not
protect.

Now, here is the part that, I'm afraid, you really are not going to
like: We cannot give you permission to proceed with your project of
translating NR into Modulo 3.  There are several reasons for this, but
a sufficient one is that we have licensees who have purchased
translation rights to NR for very substantial amounts of money (and
with very strong controls by us on their quality).  Some of our
contracts specify that we are not allowed to sell comparable rights
for less than these licensees paid.  Letting you proceed would, in our
opinion, violate these contracts.

We must therefore ask you to terminate your project immediately, and
especially to remove all code derived from NR from your Web page and
any other public area.  Although we are not hereby giving you
permission to do so, I want to mention that it is probably "fair use"
for you to translate NR into Modulo 3 for your own use on specific
computers (to the extent that you have a valid license from us to use
NR on those computers), but those translations are in copyright limbo:
they are "derivative works" of our copyrighted work, and you can't
transfer them to anyone else, even to people who themselves already
have NR licenses.  (The transferring is what very likely goes beyond
"fair use" provisions in the law.)

I am genuinely sorry that I must write such a negative response
to your straightforward inquiry.

Sincerely,
Bill Press
Numerical Recipes

